# PNRL: A System to Support Reinforcement Learning Development in an Undergraduate AI Course (includes Python-Java Integration)

This repository contains code for the backend logic of a Reinforcement Learning-based Puddle World game implemented in Java, along with code for integrating Python code to Java code for the Game of Amazons. 

Link to thesis written on the code: (Honors Thesis - Chinmay Arvind, April 2025)[https://www.overleaf.com/read/zkfdmfqqptjq#5654b2]

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a key learning model in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and has been used to create game-based learning environments for training AI agents. However, these environments have been either too basic or too advanced to be adopted as a tool to teach RL concepts within an undergraduate AI course. In this thesis, a system called PNRL (Puddle Navigator Reinforcement Learning) is proposed, that uses a client-server architecture to create an environment for game-based learning to take place and support student learning of RL concepts at a sufficiently complex level for undergraduate students in an AI course. The puddle world problem is a benchmark problem in which an AI agent needs to learn how to navigate a grid world to achieve a goal by exploring the environment. This thesis explains the architecture of PNRL, its communication protocol that enable students to write parts of the client-side agent so moves are made and sent to the server, allowing instructors to evaluate the student’s understanding of RL concepts. The system as a whole is tested for its effectiveness in handling complex communication protocols and the client-side agent is tested on its learning process predictability. A comparison of agent training termination conditions in terms of time-feasibility and learning process predictability is also conducted to find the most feasible condition in supporting student learning of RL concepts. Our evaluation indicates that the agent implemented in PNRL is predictable in its learning process in the given training period and the maximum steps training termination condition is the most predictable in its learning process. The system is deemed reliable in handling communication, and the maximum steps training termination condition is the most feasible to support student learning. This thesis also briefly discusses our investigation into the possibility of Python-Java integration to support the enhancement of the gaming server system in UBC’s COSC 322 AI course.

This thesis is the original intellectual work of the author, Chinmay Arvind, and the research within this thesis was completed under the supervision of Dr. Yong Gao. The conceptual review conducted in Section 2.1 is based on the concepts described in Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto’s textbook, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The rest of the thesis is entirely my original work.

This thesis introduces a system called PNRL (Puddle Navigator Reinforcement Learning), a client-server-based architecture containing the logic of a game-based RL system. It includes a fully-functional RL agent within a puddle world, whose learning process predictability in different environment settings is evaluated to determine its feasibility in terms of aiding student learning of RL concepts. Server-side metrics are also computed to verify the effectiveness of the system in handling communication. To use this system as part of game-based learning in an AI course at the undergraduate level, parts of the agent will be given to students and the rest of the code will be their task to write. As they build parts of the system they will get feedback via backend logs to see whether their agent is learning to navigate the puddle world environment effectively through Q-value updates, episode summaries, and epsilon updates. The system as a whole is implemented as an integral part of the COSC 322 API and evaluated for its feasibility based on the training termination conditions for the RL agent to find the ideal settings in supporting student learning of RL concepts involved.

This thesis also briefly touches on the cross-language integration of Python and Java programming languages in the context of the COSC 322 API. Development for the Game of Amazons project is made easier for students to code in with the use of Python, which they may be more comfortable with and will enable them to use machine learning libraries defined in Python in their code.
